Studio Ghibli, Nippon Television
Network, Dentsu, Hakuhodo DYMP,
Walt Disney Japan, Mitsubishi,
Toho and KDDI present
[soft piano music]
[chopping]
[Narrator] Once upon a time,
long, long ago now,
there lived an
old bamboo cutter.
He would make his way
into the mountain forest
and cut wild bamboo
from which he made all
sorts of useful things.
His name was
Sanuki no Miyatsuko.
[rustling]
One day he noticed
a light shining
from inside a bamboo stalk.
Curious, the bamboo
cutter approached it.
As he approached it,
the light flowed into the ground
creating something he
had never seen before.
What is this? Bamboo shoot
sprouting so early?
Even before the plums?
[gasps]
What is this?!
[soft piano music]
Have mercy on me.
[gasps]
Hello...
...may I ask please,
who might you be, my lady?
[soft piano music]
[yawns]
Oh my! She's such a
beautiful little princess!
It's a miracle!
This must be a blessing
from Heaven, I'm sure of it!
[gasps]
[water running, birds chirping]
You're back early.
Something wrong?
Oh! What a beautiful
little doll!
No, quiet! You'll wake her.
She's sleeping!
Shh.
[gasps]
She just appeared to
me in the grove.
Appeared?
Definitely a
blessing from Heaven.
Hey, Heaven gave her to me!
Oh, well I'm the one
who'll raise her.
Raise her? She's already
a perfect little princess.
No, no, no, don't be silly.
There's more to raising
a child than you think.
Right?
[sighs]
Here, let me take her.
[Princess crying]
Don't just sit there!
Go find a length of cloth
or something warm
I can wrap her in!
Don't be upset, sweetheart.
We're going to take very
good care of you, I promise.
- Yes, we will.
- Will this work?
There, there!
You're going to be just fine.
That's a good girl.
What's happening?
What's going on?
Can't you see she wants me to be
the person who raises her?
Huh? Huh?
Bring me one of the
good baskets, please.
All right...
This is really strange,
you know.
I mean, think about it.
What if she's a woodland
sprite or something?
What does she look like to you?
A little baby, of course.
That's right!
But she was a beautiful
princess just a moment ago!
Well, I have to
believe that's Heaven
showing us what a beautiful
princess she's going to become
some day when
she's all grown up.
- You're right!
- Of course!
So that means we have to
raise the baby properly
right from the start.
Yes! That must be it. I see.
I'm glad you understand.
[chuckles]
I'll be right there helping.
Wait. We have to find
a breast for her.
That's why I'm taking
her to a wet nurse.
Yes, I heard there
was a new baby
in the woodworkers' settlement.
Is that what this is for?
Yes, we have to bring a gift.
What's wrong?
[bird chirping]
[panting]
[crying]
Hey, hey...
What are you doing?!
Oh you poor thing.
I guess you were really hungry!
How did you do that?
You see? She's very content,
she's drinking it right down.
Yeah...
I can't begin to
explain it, but I have milk!
[calm flute music]
[wind rustling]
[laughs]
She's laughing!
I might be imagining it,
but she feels heavier!
That can't be!
[bright music]
[laughs]
- Oh!
- What's the matter?
She just got even heavier!
What? Let me see.
She seems to be growing
right before our very eyes.
[sings]
[bright music]
Look! The plum blossoms!
[bird chirping]
[laughs]
Oh!
I think she's gotten a
little heavier!
You see?
She's certainly healthy,
isn't she?
[Narrator]
And from that day forward,
the bamboo cutter and his wife
carefully raised this
miraculous child
as if she were their very own.
[bright music]
[Princess coos]
[both laugh]
[birds chirping]
[Princess coos]
Huh?
[whines]
Careful! You do not
want to touch those.
Look! There's a baby in there!
Can you make it?
Stop pushing!
See! There she is!
[bright music]
Hey! She's looking over here!
Yeah she is!
No she's not!
[laughs]
[frogs croaking]
[frog croaking]
[blows raspberry]
Huh?
What's the matter?
[Princess coos]
[frog croaks]
[bright music]
[chuckles]
- Oh!
- Hey!
[whines]
[frogs croaking]
[Princess laughs]
[all gasp]
[Miyatsuko]
Princess! Princess!
Oh!
[laughs]
She's standing!
She's begun to walk!
Oh!
Oh, my!
[cries]
Hey now.
There, there, there.
C'mon. All right.
Ha! That kid's weird!
- She can walk now!
- Yeah! She was just crawling.
I think she just
got bigger, too!
She grows fast... like bamboo!
That'll be her name!
- Li'l Bamboo!
- That's perfect!
Li'l Bamboo!
[all kids]
What do you mean Li'l Bamboo?
She's Princess! Princess!
Li'l Bamboo!
Little Bam... Awwww!
Princess! Come here!
Atta girl, come here.
- Princess...
- Li'l Bamboo!
- Be quiet!
Princess, come here!
- Li'l Bamboo!
- Princess, come here!
Princess! Princess! Come here!
Come here! Princess!
Come on, Princess!
Princess! Come here!
That's my girl. Yeah!
[Princess laughs]
Woohoo! Wee!
[calm music]
[bird cries]
[birds chirping]
[bright music]
You want to come with me?
Come on!
[Princess laughs]
[chopping]
We'll have these
bamboo shoots for dinner.
Dinner! Dinner!
Bamboo shoot! Bamboo shoot!
All right, now.
Stand back, Princess.
[Princess sighs]
[kid] There's lots of them.
Yeah!
[kids laughing]
[chopping]
[frogs croaking]
[piglets grunting]
Ah!
[giggles]
Ha!
[piglets grunting]
[laughs]
Come here!
[giggles]
[piglets oinking]
[laughs]
[piglets squeal]
[gasps]
[boar grunting]
[both gasp]
[thuds]
[boar squealing]
Stupid! You don't mess
with wild boar piglets!
Huh?
You are really a strange kid.
It looks like you
just got bigger!
[kid]
That kid's weird, Sutemaru.
Woah! Look at her!
She's growin' again!
She's just like a bamboo shoot.
- Yeah, you're right.
- Bamboo shoot! For dinner!
Bamboo shoot! Bamboo shoot!
[kids]
Bamboo shoot!
Li'l Bamboo!
[kids laugh]
♪ Go round, go round,
waterwheel go round. ♪
♪ Go round and call Mr. Sun. ♪
♪ Birds, bugs, beasts,
grass, flowers and trees. ♪
♪ Spring, summer, autumn,
winter, bring 'em all on. ♪
♪ Go round, go round,
waterwheel go round. ♪
♪ Go round and call Mr. Sun. ♪
♪ Spring, summer, autumn,
winter, bring 'em all on. ♪
♪ Birds! Bugs! ♪
♪ Flowers! ♪
♪ Go round and call Mr. Sun. ♪
♪ Spring, summer, autumn... ♪
Hey, tell me something.
- How come you know this song?
- I just know it!
[kids]
♪ Go round, go round... ♪
[Princess]
♪ Come round, oh distant time ♪
♪ come round, oh distant time.
♪ Come round,
call back my heart. ♪
♪ Birds, bugs, beasts, ♪
♪ grass, flowers and trees ♪
♪ teach people how to feel. ♪
♪ If I hear that
you pine for me, ♪
♪ I will want to
return to you. ♪
Those aren't the words.
Hey, she's crying!
Yeah, she is!
What's wrong?
I don't know.
She's so weird!
[laughing]
Look, that's where our
houses are.
And that's your bamboo grove.
Yay! Bamboo shoots!
Come on.
It's time to go.
Come on!
Princess!
Where are you?
Where... where are you?
Where could she have gone?
[gasps]
[mysterious music]
What is that?
[gasps]
What's this?
[tinkling]
[rain splashing]
[Princess laughing]
[peaceful music]
[kids laughing]
I'll be back later!
Be careful now!
I will!
I'm a little worried.
Those boys are rough.
She might get hurt
playing with them.
They're fine, don't worry.
It's good for her!
Yeah, it's just that
up in the bamboo grove...
Ah. No, it's nothing.
No, no, that's lacquer.
You'll get a rash!
Lacquer?
That smells good!
He's going to make
bowls out of those.
Really?
Wow!
That's my father, my brother,
and my mother.
[chopping]
[Princess gasps]
[kids shouting, laughing]
Bring us a present!
Bye! Bring us back a present!
This is the bamboo
cutter's daughter.
Li'l Bamboo.
[kids laughing]
Li'l Bamboo! It's okay!
- C'mon!
- Jump!
[all gasp]
[Princess gasps]
[insects buzzing]
[boy]
It's really hot!
I'm thirsty.
I bet those...
I bet those are so sweet.
They are?
Hey! Come back!
[grunts]
Let's go!
Someone's coming!
[both grunt]
Leave it!
Hmm.
[sighs]
[grunts]
I'll save this for the others.
[coughs]
[Princess] Mmm.
Delicious!
[bright music]
[laughing]
[mysterious music]
[gasps]
Today, when I saw
these beautiful robes
shooting up in the air,
I finally realized
what Heaven wishes to be done.
What Heaven wishes to be done?
To give Princess a way of life
that is appropriate
to this robe.
Raise her as a princess
of noble rank.
That is what Heaven
expects of us.
What are you saying?
With this gold I was given,
I'm going to build the Princess
a fine mansion in the capital.
You're taking her
to the capital?
I must.
Out here in these mountains,
she's nothing but
a country girl.
Up in the capital, she'll become
a noble princess.
She'll have the opportunity
to meet other nobility.
And I believe she'll be happier.
Well, in any case, that is the
command of the Heavens.
I don't know about this.
Well, I do.
Anyway, tomorrow I will
travel to the capital.
[slow music]
[Narrator] From the next
day on, the old bamboo cutter
went to the capital city often.
The front of his kimono
filled with gold.
The summer season passed
and the time of the autumn
harvest came 'round.
[kids]
♪ Blow, wind, blow, blow. ♪
♪ Blow, blow hard, oh wind. ♪
- [baby crying]
- ♪ Bring the fruit of the... ♪
Li'l Bamboo,
can you please take him!
Sure!
♪ Bring the fruits of
the mountains. ♪
♪ Oh, chestnuts, chestnuts, ♪
♪ mushrooms, mountain,
mountain grapes. ♪
- ♪ Fall, beech nuts... ♪
- Pick up! Pick up!
Pick up! Pick up!
Ow!
[laughs]
[peaceful music]
I'm gonna get this all over you!
[laughing]
Look! A pheasant!
It's heading for you,
Li'l Bamboo!
Chase it to the left!
I got it!
Coming your way, Sutemaru!
- Way to go!
- Get it!
[grunts]
You're not gettin' away!
[panting]
[grunts]
[gasps]
Sutemaru!
Sutemaru! Sutemaru!
Sutemaru, are you okay?
[groans]
[kids]
Sutemaru! Sutemaru!
[groans]
I got it...
I got it!
- Yeah, he got it!
- Wow!
That's amazing!
Are you okay?
I'm coming down to help you.
It won't hold!
[gasping]
[both grunt]
Sutemaru! I'm really sorry.
Are you okay?
Stupid! Those rocks are
too loose to climb!
I'm sorry.
Go find a long piece of
ivy and bring it here!
Yeah, okay!
[gasps]
Hey! You're bleeding!
It's nothing a little bit
of spit won't fix.
No, wait.
There you go.
Li'l Bamboo...
...have you gotten bigger again?
Yeah? You think so?
I do.
I have this feeling you're
going to keep on growing.
And go somewhere different,
and leave us behind.
I don't know why you
would say that.
Your Li'l Bamboo will always
be here with you...
...forever and ever.
And I'll always be a part of
your gang forever and ever, too.
[boy]
Sutemaru!
Is this one all right?
[Sutemaru]
Looks good.
Tie it to a tree!
- We did!
- Good.
[grunting]
- Here.
- Thanks.
[grunts]
[gasps]
Hey, look at this!
There's mushrooms here.
Look, Sutemaru!
They look delicious!
There's so many of
them growing here.
Tomorrow we can make
stew for everyone.
Yeah!
I'll get the pheasant ready!
Yay! Pheasant stew!
Pheasant! Pheasant!
Pheasant stew!
[bright music]
[Princess]
Sorry I'm late.
Sutemaru caught a pheasant.
And we found some mushrooms!
Oh, and mountain grapes!
Where are you going?
The capital.
The capital?
Me, too?
Right now?
Yes. Just leave the
basket on the ground.
What? But... we're making
pheasant stew tomorrow,
I promised Sutemaru that--
Just put it down.
Now... let's go.
[slow music]
Can we come back tomorrow
in time for stew?
[Narrator] But for the
Princess and for Sutemaru,
that tomorrow never came.
[sighs]
Ah!
The young lady is awake.
Uh...
Good morning, milady.
If you please...
Ah! Well, well, Princess...
...and can I ask after
Your Highness's mood?
...would you be in the
best of spirituals today?
Is that you, Momma?
And Poppa?
[laughs]
You both look so funny!
Why are you dressed like that?
I suppose we aren't
doing this right.
I am!
My Princess, get yourself
a change of range.
I mean a range of chobe!
[Momma laughs]
Sorry... get a change of robe!
All of these robes are yours,
Your Highness.
Wow!
[laughs]
They smell good!
[Princess]
They're beautiful!
[laughs]
They're like falling rainbows!
[laughing]
She's having a great time.
She seems to like them.
Well, of course.
As of today, this will be
our new home.
This mansion is ours?
[Momma]
That's right!
[laughs, sighs]
This is fantastic!
[laughing]
Poppa, I can swim
in there, can't I?
Oh!
You most certainly will
not swim in there.
Ah!
A noble princess
would never frolic.
Nor even consider partaking
in such unlady-like antics.
Your Highness...
I've have thusly summoned
Lady Sagami here
from the palace
to educate you
in the ways of nobility.
Her job is to make you
a noble princess.
Noble princess?
From the palace?
My Lord, this child is clearly
in desperate need
of my instruction.
Naturally, I would have liked
to have started earlier,
but I, Sagami, will mold her
into a truly fine young lady.
[Narrator] And so the Princess,
under Lady Sagami's tutelage,
began to learn the airs
and graces of a noble lady.
Watch this carefully.
Keep your back like so,
as straight as an arrow.
Swish up perfectly, like this.
Swish?
Ah!
That is approximately correct.
The truth is, a noble princess
stands only on rare occasions.
But, how do I move if I want
to pick up something?
Like this...
come to a kneeling position,
and shuffle your knees
to move gracefully.
Shuffle, shuffle, shuffle.
Notice nothing else moves.
Your Highness!
We are far from done!
Wow.
It is a beautiful scroll,
is it not?
The proper way of looking
at it is like this,
so the story flows.
[Sagami gasps]
Look, now it's really flowing!
[Sagami sighs]
[gentle music]
How about a small reward?
It makes me so proud to
see you practicing your letters!
I'm happy to see my
teachings are reaching you!
[gasps]
Oh!
Your Highness!
Yes, now once more together.
Hey, that was fun!
Your Highness!
How's practice coming along?
Is everything going smoothly?
My, my Lord!
Huh?
I trust you are well, Father.
Oh my!
Oh...
You've become so
elegant that I--
I hardly recognize you!
How about the koto lessons?
Are they coming along as well?
We've only just begun.
She only knows a few notes...
My! How beautiful!
It's very suspicious,
and I'm starting to wonder
if someone else has
trained her before.
In front of you,
she performs perfectly
but with me, she's all games.
So I was right.
Your Highness is a being
who's come straight
down from Heaven.
She was never supposed
to stay in the mountains
like some kind
of common girl.
[Narrator] With her
father watching proudly,
the Princess devoted herself
to Lady Sagami's training.
What is happening here?
Why are you still behaving
like some kind of a servant?
You are, if nothing else,
the mother to a noble princess.
But this is the only way I feel
at ease living in this house.
And it's because
you feel that way
the Princess never changes her--
Princess, what's wrong?
You're extremely quiet today.
Come over here and
listen, husband.
[whispering] Let me
tell you what's happened...
What? Really?
Yes.
Well, that's wonderful news!
We'll have to hold
a great banquet!
A banquet?
A celebration of
your coming of age.
Well, of course!
This is the happiest
of occasions!
If we're having a party,
can we invite my friends?
Huh?
I'd love to see them all!
Your friends from the village.
That would be wonderful for you.
Don't be stupid!
You don't understand anything!
Do you realize how
important this is?
We live in a much different
world than those
hillbillies back in
our old village.
This banquet will make you
a truly noble princess.
So right after the new year,
we'll have a celebration!
The putting up of hair,
and the naming ritual.
But Poppa...
Ha! This is wonderful!
I mean, it's wonderful!
Wait! I'll ask Inbe no Akita...
he'll serve as the
"Name Father."
Hello?
Is anybody there?
Lady Sagami? Lady Sagami!
What a bore.
[sighs]
♪ Birds, bugs, beasts,
grass, flowers and trees, ♪
♪ teach people how to feel. ♪
Momma, would you give
a part of the garden to me?
Why?
It would be fun to plant
some of the things I like.
Yes, yes of course,
if it makes you happy.
You can do whatever
you want with it.
Thank you, Momma.
[peaceful music]
[Princess]
No! Get away!
You will never be a noble
princess looking as you do now.
Without eyebrows, the sweat
will run into my eyes!
Don't be ridiculous...
for a noble
princess does nothing
that will make her perspire.
- Come...
- Why would I want black teeth?
I wouldn't open my mouth, then!
And I won't be able
to laugh anymore!
You won't have to
worry about that,
for a noble princess does not
open her mouth to laugh!
That's stupid!
Even a noble princess
must sweat,
and sometimes want
to laugh out loud!
Surely they want to cry!
Or get mad, and want to scream!
Oh no! A noble princess
should never show her--
Then a noble princess
is not human!
Oh!
[girl]
Princess!
[Princess]
The poor thing was all tied up!
[Princess laughs]
[Sagami]
Your Highness!
This way, Lord Akita,
and thank you for coming.
Hmm...
[bell jingles]
[Princess laughs]
[cat meows]
Princess!
[gasps]
[laughs]
This is extremely
embarrassing...
I'm afraid she's
still but a child.
Oh, not at all.
She looks like an
adorable little princess.
She hasn't been
properly made up yet.
I'm truly ashamed and
I must apologize to you.
No, please don't give it
another thought.
If I see her face
as it really is,
the better I can divine of a
truly appropriate
name for the princess.
Those are very welcome words.
I have every confidence
that you will...
bestow upon our princess
a very fine name.
Please,
Your Highness, come out...
greet this gentleman
who will give you your name.
Hmm.
Ah.
How do you do, my Lord?
It's an honor to meet you.
Your Highness, if you wouldn't
mind, perhaps you could
perform something on the koto
for our esteemable guest.
Beautiful!
The Shining Princess
of the Supple Bamboo.
[Miyatsuko]
The Shining Princess
[Momma]
of the Supple Bamboo?
Yes.
She has a form as graceful
as supple bamboo
and a beauty that radiates
out from her. Superb!
So then I add a name for
Princess of the Shining Light.
And thus I suggest to you,
the name "Princess Kaguya."
Yes! How beautiful!
I'm so proud, Lord Akita.
That's the most wonderfulest
name I've ever heard.
Thank you very much.
[slow music]
[Narrator]
As is the custom,
the naming ceremony
was followed by
putting up the hair,
and donning the trailing skirt.
Soon after, large
numbers were invited
to the great banquet,
to celebrate the naming
of Princess Kaguya.
[crowd chatting]
Congratulations!
Princess Kaguya. You have given
her a truly fine name.
Thank you!
This is wonderful, right?
Just wonderful.
There are many good gentlemen
who have come to the banquet!
Then the purpose of this
banquet is to celebrate
the taking of my name?
Of course it is, Ma'am.
Yes, but... all I'm doing
is sitting here.
It's like... I'm not even
at my own party.
[clapping, shouting]
[upbeat music]
Thank you very much!
We appreciate it!
[Narrator]
The banquet to celebrate
the naming of Princess Kaguya
went on for three days
and three nights.
Here! To Princess Kaguya!
To celebrate the putting
up of her hair!
A fine thing, yes?
Really, my friend,
this is all a bit pretentious,
don't you think?
- What?
- The Princess...
The so-called Princess?
Come on you know what we mean!
Princess Kaguya or whoever...
her flower of a face enshrined
behind that blind.
Surely there wouldn't be any
harm in allowing us to see her,
if she's as
beautiful as they say!
- Yeah, why not?
- I agree!
No, no! I'm afraid that would
be out of the question!
What's happening here?
We've come to
celebrate her naming,
and we don't even
get to say hello?
I'm sorry, but that's just
the way things are done!
What do you mean,
"the way things are done?"
No, wait!
There's no noble princess here!
Yeah! You're right!
What are you saying?
Her Highest is a princess!
- "Her Highest?"
- How much did it cost?
A naming ceremony
for this princess?
Who cares about that?
At least show her to us!
Maybe she looks like
some kind of goblin!
Or worse!
[men laughing]
[Princess gasps]
[intense music]
[Princess groans]
[panting]
[water trickling]
[yawns]
Oh!
[baby cries]
[gasps]
[panting]
[breathing hard]
Excuse me...
where did the people
who were living down below go?
Hmm.
I wouldn't know.
They packed themselves up.
Took off on a journey
to find better wood.
Better wood?
They probably won't be
back for ten years.
Ten years?
If you use up all the trees,
the mountain's ruined.
But if you leave the
mountain its power,
and go on a journey,
it comes back to life.
Trees need a good ten years,
then you can work them again.
It's like that for
charcoal burning, too.
I see.
But the mountain
looks dead already.
The leaves used to be
so full and bright here.
Everything comes
back eventually.
See for yourself.
The trees are already
getting ready for spring.
Getting ready?
So spring will come back again?
Sure it will.
It's like a circle.
Just when you think one ends,
another begins again.
You can always count on it.
So who might you be?
[gentle music]
I've seen this before.
I've seen it...
[bells ringing]
[sighs]
[people chatting in distance]
[gasps]
[soft snoring]
[people laughing in distance]
[gentle music]
[humming]
[Narrator]
From that day forward,
it was as if Princess Kaguya
was another person,
devoting herself to her studies
and passing her days in silence.
[grunting]
Here, dear. Look!
Look at this huge pile
of gifts from the nobility!
The high-born have
now accepted you!
Whoa! See?
They obviously consider
you to be one of them.
[bird chirping]
You know what? This bird
deserves a much better space.
How about for old times'
sake I weave you
a fine bamboo cage
to keep him in?
Now what do you think
about that, huh?
Thank you, Father.
Ha ha!
Wonderful! That's wonderful.
I mean wonderful, wonderful!
I'll just leave
the bird right here.
Thanks be to Heaven!
[bird singing]
[Narrator]
As time went on,
rumors of the Princess's
beauty grew.
The streets outside the mansion
became crammed with people
hoping to catch a glimpse of
the mysterious Princess Kaguya.
Hey!
Are you a servant for
Princess Kaguya?
If you are,
give her this for me.
No! You must give
this to her first!
- See that she gets this please!
- She needs this gift!
You must take this
to her right away!
There's another crowd of
gentlemen suitors in the street.
They were very persistent.
They gave me all these letters
they demanded I pass on to you!
So I am.
And since it seems
to be impossible
for you to go outside
the mansion,
I thought I'd bring you
some cherry blossoms.
Thank you.
[steady music]
[bells ringing]
I hear you have summoned me,
Prince Ishitsukuri?
Yes, it's about
that rich upstart's
daughter whom you named...
Oh, you're talking about
Princess Kaguya!
[Prince Ishitsukuri]
Shh! Keep your voice down!
Did you say "Princess Kaguya"?
Oh, Princess Kaguya! I have
heard the rumors about her.
They say that
she's very beautiful.
Fool! You had to raise
your voice, didn't you?
But no matter how beautiful
they say she is,
she is still of humble birth.
So she is not a woman
appropriate for any of us.
Even you have to admit, Akita,
that Princess Kaguya is a
very presumptuous name
to be giving the likes of
a commoner's daughter.
No matter how
much you paid for it.
Not so, Lord Minister!
This beautiful girl is not
Miyatsuko's true daughter.
She was found in a bamboo stalk.
What?! A bamboo stalk?
Now that is interesting.
She could be some kind
of forest sprite.
After seeing her
with my own eyes,
that is entirely
possible, my Lord.
Really?
I must confess that the moment
I stood before Princess Kaguya
this old man's body
began to tremble
as if a dry fountain had
come flowing back to life.
Even remembering her now,
words fail to express her
glimmering beauty and
my heart surges as I remember
every moment looking at her.
[wheel rumbling]
- Ah!
- Get out of way!
Out of the way!
[people screaming]
I swear I will win this race!
I must get to her first!
That glimmering beauty
will be mine, I tell you!
Nothing will stop me!
The one who will win
her is me! I swear it!
She will be my wife!
[shouts]
Lady Sagami!
You have to see these!
What is it, my Lord?
Just look at these!
Look at them all!
Five of the most high-born
men in the land
have come calling for
one simple reason!
They want to marry the Princess!
Oh, my!
Oh, wonderful! Wonderful!
All these princes are
interested in her.
And even the Minister
of the Right!
But how do we choose among them?
It's going to be a very
difficult challenge.
And to make matters worse,
they're all waiting impatiently
in formal dress,
even as we speak.
I will take care of this.
Leave Her Highness to me.
You go entertain them,
and whatever you do,
keep them happy!
Alright, milady.
Oh, and thank you,
thank you, thank you!
[sighs]
Wonderful! Wonderful!
I just knew that banquet
was worth putting on!
These are five proposals
from five of the most
important nobles in the land.
Whichever one you choose,
you cannot go wrong.
But I've never even met them.
Oh, please don't worry.
This is very simple,
you will pick a proposal
from one of these
noble gentlemen
and then you'll meet him
on your wedding day.
It hardly matters, because
with any of these
fine, princely men
you will be happy
forever, and ever!
I'm supposed to feel happy?
I have no intention of
marrying anyone yet.
Have you lost your mind?
Once you have become
a noble princess
you must marry a
suitable gentleman
as quickly as possible!
That is the very definition
of happiness!
Why would you even think twice?
With any of those men,
your happiness would be
completely guaranteed.
I do not want any of it!
So please tell
those men to leave.
Do you really want to hurt
your father like this?
Do you understand that
he is as happy for you
as he would be for himself!
[birds chirping]
Everything has been
made ready for you.
If you would be so kind
to come this way...
[grunting]
[grumbling]
Now please,
express your proposals
to the princess in order.
[clears throat]
I am Prince Kuramochi.
Princess...
as you know my true feelings
have been clearly stated
in the letter that has
been given to you.
Your Highness,
Princess Kaguya,
if I was so fortunate
that you became my wife
it would be...
as if I plucked a branch
of the tree of jewels
that grows on the
mountain of Horai,
whose trunk is of gold
and whose fruits are
the whitest of pearls.
Princess Kaguya,
you are an exquisite treasure
that is as unattainable,
precious as that--
I am Prince Ishitsukuri.
Princess Kaguya, if you
consent to be my wife,
I will worship you
morning and night
my forehead pressed to the
ground in utter devotion.
You are a treasure
I would revere
as much as the stone begging
bowl of Lord Buddha himself.
You would worship her
as if she were some kind of
cold stone bowl?
Princess Kaguya, to me you are
as a robe of fire-rat fur.
From which,
when thrown in the fire
all impurity is burned away
but which itself
is not consumed,
only shining more brightly
as the flames grow higher.
You are utterly rare,
untouched and innocent
as elusive as this
treasure about which
they speak of finding in China.
You have the gall to
compare Princess Kaguya
to a rat-skin?!
Princess to me, Counselor Otomo,
you are a fine,
glistening jewel,
a jewel that shines
intensely from above.
A gem with more radiance
than the five-colored
jewel that shines
on the dragon's neck.
Oh no, no, no!
For me, Princess Kaguya
is something more
precious and natural
like the warm cowry shell amulet
swallows use a charm
for a safe birth.
That is a true treasure.
A true treasure...
You think a boring, everyday
seashell is a treasure?!
You must be crazy!
Well, well... a dragon's neck
stinks you know!
It's on the neck!
[playing koto]
[men gasp]
[koto music continues]
What a beautiful sound.
She is truly gifted.
[Princess] Gentlemen, I am most
grateful for these sentiments
you express to someone
you have never seen or met.
Yet, there is something
else I require.
These rare treasures that are
difficult to obtain,
I ask that you bring them to me.
[all]
Huh?
Then, and only then,
will I be able
to clearly and fully understand
how you treasure me
in your hearts.
Prince Kuramochi,
present to me
a jeweled branch
from Mount Horai.
Prince Ishitsukuri, the stone
begging bowl of Lord Buddha.
Lord Minister of the Right Abe,
bring a robe made
of fire-rat fur.
Excuse me?!
Grand Counselor Otomo,
obtain the jewel from the
great dragon's neck.
Middle Counselor Isonokami,
please bring me the
swallow's cowry shell,
the amulet of easy childbirth.
Wait, wait but that...
No, no, no, no, no...
All these items would be
impossible to find!
Even if they do exist!
Princess, these five
gentlemen were only
using them as comparisons!
Yes.
All these gentlemen compared me
to very rare treasures.
Therefore...
whomever can present
me the real treasure,
I will happily become
that noble gentleman's
real treasure.
Gentlemen, please...
I humbly apologize!
My daughter knows nothing of
the ways of the world.
But she must be a
beautiful princess.
Her voice, her music...
Indeed! I must say that melody
was quite out of this world.
The truth is she's asking
us to achieve
an impossible task!
Impossible! It can't be done.
She'll remain a jewel that
no one can acquire.
[Miyatsuko sighs]
[panting]
This is terrible!
When the nobles left,
so did all the other people
who were waiting
in front of the mansion!
They disappeared just
like the tide going out.
Exactly.
I thought I'd better let
you know right away.
[gasps]
Your Highness!
[laughs]
Come on! Let's go.
Go?
- Where?
- Outside!
Outside?
Yes, let's go see the
cherry blossoms!
You know what?
We should ask Father and Mother
to come along with us!
I'm sorry but there is no longer
anything I can do.
But, but...
The next time I'm sure
the Princess will try to...
There will certainly be
no next time.
She has burned her last bridge.
I will take my leave of you.
Oh no, please don't go.
Squire Miyatsuko, the cart Her
Highness requested has arrived.
They're just
waiting for you, sir.
Tell them to go
ahead without me!
I'm not going.
[wings fluttering]
[bright music]
[birds singing, water trickling]
[bee buzzing]
[Momma and Princess gasp]
Oh my.
- Beautiful!
- Wow!
[Princess gasps]
Stop here!
[birds chirping]
[laughs]
Oh my. It's beautiful!
[bright music]
[gasps]
[laughing]
[kids laughing]
[baby] Ah!
[Princess gasps]
Oh no!
[woman gasps]
I am very sorry, Your Highness.
Please forgive us!
Let's go.
[kids laughing]
The cherry blossoms are
right at their peak.
I must say they're certainly
splendid to experience.
Let's go home.
But...
[melancholic music]
[crowd chattering]
[man]
Keep everyone back!
- Stay back! Stay back!
- Clear a space here!
There seems to have been
an accident up ahead.
Oh! Someone's running this way!
[man]
Sutemaru!
- Sutemaru?
- This way!
[laughing]
[chicken clucking]
[woman] Better run, little one!
Sutemaru!
What are you doing?
Come on! Let's get out of here!
We're going!
[gasps]
[crying]
Li'l Bamboo!
[chicken clucking]
[grunting]
[thudding, grunting]
Sutemaru!
[crying]
[rain splashing]
[melancholic music]
Let's go.
[thunder rumbling]
[melancholic music]
[Narrator]
Three years passed.
Ah!
Go on.
It's a lovely day, isn't it?
The plants in the garden
seem to be thriving.
Yes, but you know...
it looks completely different
from down here.
Wow.
[insects buzzing]
Yes!
See? It looks like the
mountain, doesn't it?
You're right.
There's a forest, and a hill...
Oh my! It is just like home.
That's right!
And see the cogon grass?
It looks just like
the bamboo grove.
And the mugwort looks
just like trees.
And Mr. Moon could rise up
from right behind those
mountains, couldn't he?
Yes! And look...
we could go across that bridge
and climb over the hill!
[door bangs open]
Princess!
Princess! Where is the princess?
You're in the kitchen, again?
And what's wrong with
that once in a while?
It's not once in a while,
it's all the time!
Anyway...
- I have news about Kuramochi.
- [Princess] What?!
He brought back the jeweled
branch from Mount Horai!
It's quite an accomplishment.
Impossible!
Yes, yes, and I never thought
such a thing would happen,
believe me!
He's true to his word!
An impossible task and
he pulled it off.
I wouldn't be surprised
if he were angry,
but he really did
what he said he'd do!
[laughs]
Now, after we receive the gift,
you must prepare
yourself quickly
to be married to the Prince.
My heavens! I have to go!
I must prepare a bedchamber
for the Prince
and Your Highness.
Yow!
If only Lady Sagami were here!
[Princess]
I don't believe it.
Prepare a bedchamber?
Where is the princess?
Quickly,
where is Princess Kaguya?
Please wait, Your Highness!
Please wait!
Ah, Mr. Miyatsuko!
Please forgive my appearance.
I was so anxious to get here,
I didn't have time
to change my traveling clothes!
Your Highness, your presence
is always welcome here.
This is most truly wonderful.
Please come in.
I'll show you the way.
[Miyatsuko]
Splendid.
Without further ado, I will
present the promised object.
[jingling]
[gasps]
What can I say, it's dazzling!
It leaves me speechless,
it's so... what, uh...
It is, as you requested, the
jeweled branch of Mount Horai.
Princess Kaguya, can you see it?
Come closer.
Here, I will bring
it closer to you.
[Princess]
One moment please.
[Kuramochi]
Oh!
First, allow me to ask
you how you found it.
It must be quite a story.
Oh, it is quite a story!
Oh!
[laughs]
Three years ago, I vowed to
carry out Your Highness's wish.
I then set my plan in motion.
From the harbor at Naniwa
I set course for
the mountain of Horai.
We were tossed by fierce waves,
we nearly starved
from lack of food,
and after a grueling,
harrowing journey...
Behold!
What is that mountain?
So forbidding yet
so very beautiful?
What is this?
It flows with water of
gold and precious gems!
Look!
A maiden scoops water
with a silver bowl!
Dear Maiden...
Please tell me what is the
name of that mountain?
That is the mountain of Horai.
And you are very brave
to have traveled so far.
Ah! I had finally arrived at
the mountain of Horai.
Without a second glance
at the lovely maiden,
I climbed the mountain.
Behold! Those precious,
exquisite trees!
Silver branches, a trunk of
gold, and fruit of pearls!
So beautiful it
takes my breath away!
[sighs]
Are these not the jeweled
branches of Horai,
the very thing that Princess
Kaguya said she wished?
And thus, without haste,
I snapped off this branch
to bring to your feet.
One look is worth a
hundred stories.
Please. Won't you see
for yourself, Your Highness?
[woman screaming in distance]
[guard]
Stop! You shall not pass!
[man]
Move! Get out of our way!
What is that? What's going on?
I'm sincerely sorry.
I'll go see.
[guard]
You have no business here!
[man]
I must get this to her.
[men arguing]
Let go!
She must read this letter!
What's going on?
Just pay us our fee!
We're here to collect for the
jeweled branch that we made.
What's that?
The branch they made?
I am Ayabe no Uchimaro,
a craftsman belonging
to the Guild of Artisans.
At the order of
Prince Kuramochi,
we gathered together
precious gems,
mounted them,
and put them together
as if it came from
a jeweled tree on Mount Horai.
Really?
However, the Prince
has made no effort
to pay us what we are owed.
Well that's an outrage!
And since Princess Kaguya,
one of his concubines,
sorry, one of his wives,
was here, we decided
to take action.
Ill-mannered as such
a move may be,
in the end we thought
we had no choice.
Since the Prince has
been avoiding us...
it was our decision to try to
collect our payment from her.
That's why we have come
to call on your residence.
[laughs]
I understand. I'll talk to him.
Sir, what's going--
Where have you gone?
Where, where's the...
Where's the branch?
Father, I'm afraid the Prince
has taken his leave.
He has?
[groans]
[laughs]
We should at least
reward the artisans,
they really did quite a
nice job with that branch.
[grunts]
[Narrator]
Next to call at the mansion
was Lord Abe,
Minister of the Right.
[whimpers]
Feast your eyes on this!
It shimmers with an
absolutely wondrous light!
Hmm, mm.
It's extraordinary.
In all the world there
has never been
an engagement gift as costly
as the one I'm holding here.
However, if it should
please Princess Kaguya,
the expense is really nothing.
A mere trifle to win
the heart of this lovely damsel.
[laughs]
[Princess]
In that case, then...
Oh, the Princess is close by.
Drop it in the fire.
Huh?
Excuse me?
If it is truly made of
fire-rat fur,
it will not burn, but merely
glisten all the brighter.
Of course, Princess!
This fire-rat robe is no fake!
It's genuine. Genuine!
If placed in the fire
it should not burn.
But I fear that...
between the Princess and myself,
there remains an issue.
A grain of unwarranted impurity.
A question of my veracity
on the subject.
Is that true?
It's very possible.
All the more reason to
put it in the fire.
To burn all the impurity
of my doubts clean away.
Oh.
Uhh...
Yes, Your Highness.
[fire crackling]
[gasps]
[rustling]
Huh?
[gasps]
Look! You see?
Look!
Huh?
[yells]
[grunting]
[thuds]
[stammering]
Ow! No!
Ah! Ow!
My entire fortune
burning up in my hands!
[groaning]
[crying]
I've lost everything!
It's a complete disaster.
[growls]
What a mad sum of money
I've sunk into this robe!
Look at it now! Look, look!
This is all because you
told me to burn it!
[groaning]
[girl laughing]
How much do you think
the Minister of the Right
actually spent to
create that fake?
I'm sure that's all I am to
those gentlemen.
What?
I'm a fake jeweled branch
or a fire-rat fur robe
that turns to ashes.
Well both of them were
very expensive, it would seem.
But have no fear,
your suitors are trying!
I'm told that Grand Counselor
Otomo has gone by ship...
he's traveling to Tsukushi
in a brave attempt
to secure the stone
from the dragon's neck.
- What?
- He's doing everything he can
to bring you to him.
It's quite a story.
They say he has sent
his wife far away,
and is in the process of
completely rebuilding
his mansion.
A warrior's determination
is a very powerful thing.
[waves crashing]
[thunder rumbling]
All right, dragon!
Arise and meet your fate!
[gasps]
Watch out!
[lightning crackles]
[thunder rumbles]
[gasps]
[growling]
The dragon!
Forgive me! Forgive me!
[roaring]
[yells]
[tense music]
There are dragons everywhere!
Calm down!
The storm will pass.
[whimpering]
[Narrator] While the
warrior faced his dragons,
Prince Ishitsukuri was paying
a call on Princess Kaguya.
[slow music]
What's this? You've found
Buddha's begging bowl?
This is extraordinary,
Your Highness,
I don't know what to say.
Give it to Princess Kaguya.
So you brought something
other than the bowl?
Please just give it to her.
Well, all right.
Hey, Princess...
this is a gift from
Prince Ishitsukuri.
[Miyatsuko]
Hmm.
[Ishitsukuri]
Since first I heard her voice
three years ago...
Princess Kaguya has not left
my heart for even a moment.
I set out on my quest,
desperately searching for
Buddha's begging bowl.
Over meadow and
mountain I walked,
calling on temples
throughout the land.
Then, weary to the
point of exhaustion,
I sat myself down by
a stone on the road.
Suddenly, my eye was taken
by a beautiful wildflower
that was growing
there at my feet.
Ah! I was overwhelmed
by my feelings.
My love for the Princess
spread within me
like the blooms on
that exquisite flower.
And I had a
moment of inspiration.
It suddenly dawned on me that
what I really wanted to
bring the Princess,
and what she had
truly wished for,
was not some distant
unattainable treasure,
but this simple flower.
Which is itself a
treasure of nature.
This flower has come
to represent, for me,
the devotion with which
I love the Princess.
Devotion...
Princess Kaguya!
In truth you are to me
the only one whom I wish
to dedicate my heart.
Could you please, perhaps,
accept this lovely
flower as a token
of the depth of my feelings?
Since I was a small boy,
I have been fond of
flowers and other plants.
I am also entranced by
the nameless flowers
that grow by roadsides
or in meadows...
and in my heart,
I always wish that I could live
as do these flowers
that bloom in the field.
Princess, I want you to come
with me to that place...
together we could
leave this loud city
and its formalities.
We could go to a rich green land
where flowers
bloom in perfusion,
where birds sing and fish leap,
a place brimming with life.
Let us laugh and
sleep and sing...
let us follow our hearts.
Take pleasure in the
tasks before us
with the blessings of
the four seasons,
our needs will be supplied
and we'll spin out
a beautiful tale.
Please come with me to someplace
far away from here!
Where flowers
bloom in perfusion,
where fish leap and birds sing!
Come with me to that place!
Far away from here!
Please!
[yells]
[thuds]
Excuse me?
What's going on here?
Ah, my wife!
In a place far away
from here, husband?
I would love to be taken there,
as I did when you said
those very words to me.
I'm sorry!
I beg for your forgiveness!
[chuckles]
[groans]
[crying]
[wife] Would she have been
just like all the others?
Plucked from the field
like a flower...
and then thrown away?
How many more princesses
will be forced
to shave their heads
and go into a nunnery?
[chirping]
I got it!
[grunts]
Get me down!
[Narrator] All that remained
was Middle Counselor Isonokami,
who was in search of the
mysterious cowry shell amulet.
- Ah!
- [crowd screams]
Counselor! Counselor!
[crowd chattering]
[chirping]
The Counselor is dead?
Yes.
A great tragedy.
His back was broken
reaching for the nest.
[crying, grunting]
Goodness! What's the matter?
This garden!
It's... it's a fake!
Fake!
It's all fake and so am I!
So am I! It's fake...
Stop it.
[panting]
Everyone's miserable,
and it's all my fault.
It's not your fault. It's not.
You mustn't blame yourself.
It is my fault. All of it is my
fault, because I'm a fake.
I never wanted it to
happen like this.
My love...
I didn't ask for this.
[crying]
That may be true.
But it still doesn't
make it your fault.
[Princess crying]
[melancholic music]
[Narrator]
But in spite of her wishes,
there was even more
talk of the Princess.
And in time, His Majesty
himself began to show interest.
She has led five of the highest
nobles in the land around...
by the nose.
Interesting.
If she has so stubbornly
refused all these men,
it must be the wish of
this Princess Kaguya...
to come to me.
Let's play her game...
send word she is to
appear before me.
Yes, Your Majesty.
Her father has most certainly
raised her well,
so when she becomes mine,
give her father
the rank of court official!
As Your Majesty wishes.
Wonderful! It's wonderful!
Princess! Princess!
Husband, calm down please.
Princess!
Your Highness!
I have joyous news!
You have now come to the
attention of His Majesty,
who's summoning you
to serve in his court!
What?
It's extraordinary!
You will be one of
His Majesty's wives!
Not only that, I will wear
the hat of a court official!
[laughs]
This is wonderful!
Listen to you...
You still don't comprehend
how your daughter feels.
It is you who
doesn't understand!
All that we have done
has been for the sake of this!
For a girl born in this land,
there is no greater
happiness than joining
His Majesty in
holy wedlock. None!
Oh, now at last, after all
this effort, our Highness...
will finally be happy!
Father, I'm sorry,
but please refuse.
What?
I couldn't possibly be
a court lady now.
What are you talking about?
You're refusing
to serve in court?
Father, my answer is no.
But you can't...
No one in this land is
allowed to disobey
an order from His Majesty
in the slightest degree.
So quit thinking of
just yourself, please!
Father, if disobedience
to His Majesty
is considered a crime
punishable by death...
Well then... the only
choice is to kill me.
Princess!
Poppa, if your happiness depends
on wearing the cap of
a court official,
then I will go to
His Majesty as you wish.
And after you've put on that cap
as part of the court,
I will kill myself.
[Emperor]
What? She refused?
What is the meaning of this?
She's turned down an offer
to live at the palace?
No woman has ever
turned me down before.
Very interesting.
Now I truly want to
meet her all the more.
All right, if she's determined
to play that game,
I will grace her mansion
with a surprise visit.
Yes, Your Majesty.
This way, Your Majesty.
She plays the koto beautifully.
Her face is most angelic.
[strings strumming discordantly]
[Princess gasps]
Now, let's waste no more
time with games.
Why are you doing this?!
Why, to make
you happy, of course!
My embrace pleases all women!
Let me go!
I will never be yours!
I'm afraid that's not
an acceptable answer.
If I wish you to come,
then you must obey.
Bring around
the carriage, quickly!
[mysterious music]
[gasps]
Where is she?
Where did she go?
I see that I acted in haste.
So please,
show yourself.
You have nothing to fear.
Please, Princess.
I will simply burn the sight
of you into my eyes
and then withdraw.
[gasps]
How beautiful you are!
Remember your promise.
[sighs]
I will withdraw for today.
However, I believe your
ultimate happiness
lies in you becoming mine.
Such beauty I've never seen!
[sighs]
[melancholic music]
[Narrator] After His Majesty
returned to his palace,
Princess Kaguya would come out
to the pavilion every night
to gaze at the moon.
[sighs]
[somber music]
[Momma]
What's the matter, Princess?
Lately you never
come in to see me.
You've left your spinning to sit
and you haven't tended
to your plants for days.
You now spend most of
your nights gazing at the moon.
I don't understand, what is it?
What's happening with you?
Nothing has happened.
That's not true.
Now come on, tell me.
It's obvious from the
far-away look in your eyes.
Don't worry.
There's nothing wrong.
But... but...
Is it something you
can't tell even me?
[crying]
They're coming
to take me back...
to the moon!
The moon?
Every night I begged them
to let me stay...
with you.
But it's no use.
They're coming for me
on the fifteenth day.
Who's coming?
What's this about, Princess?
I'm very confused.
You have to help me here...
try to explain this
in simple words
an old man like me
will understand, Your Highness.
You poor thing!
There's something very deep
behind this, isn't there?
The truth is...
the day you found me,
I was sent here from the moon.
From the moon?
[Momma]
Oh.
The moon put you in the bamboo?
Yes.
I understood it on the
day His Majesty was here.
And now, on the fifteenth day,
the people of the moon
will come for me
and I must leave
you both forever.
What? I don't understand.
You're planning to leave us?
Just what is it we've done
to deserve this?
I mean from the start,
all we ever tried to do
was make sure you were
always happy.
All this happiness that
you wished for me
has been very hard to bear.
Without realizing it,
I prayed for someone to save me.
And when His Majesty
grabbed me,
in panic my heart
just screamed out,
"I don't want to
be here anymore!"
You mean...
you asked them to come here
and take you back to the moon?
That's just terrible!
What have you done?
I don't want to go back, Poppa!
I want to stay here!
I won't let it happen.
We'll fight to keep you!
We'll figure something out.
I just won't let them pass!
- We could--
- It's too late.
They are coming!
What have I been doing
here in this land?
Throwing tantrums because
I didn't want to
belong to anyone?
Ignoring what you
want from me and--
and fooling myself with
tiny fake meadows and mountains!
[sighs]
Only now...
when I'm forced to go
back to the moon,
do I finally remember...
why I came here.
And why it is, no matter
what is happening
in this strange land,
that song has always
been inside my heart.
♪ Birds, bugs, beasts, grass,
flowers and trees... ♪
Yes! That's the song.
I was...
I was born to live here!
With the birds,
bugs, and beasts.
[crying]
I don't want to leave!
Then you won't.
I will never let you go.
From the day I found you in the
[sniffs]
bamboo and held you
so gently in my arms,
I just loved you as if you
were my very own child!
[cries]
And when I picked you up and
cradled you,
put you on your feet and
changed your clothes,
I was the happiest man on
the face of the earth, like...
I was in Heaven!
[cries]
It's not too late
to save you, it's not!
You're here. We still have you!
You're still here in my arms!
And these arms of mine
will drive them away!
I will not let them take you!
No matter how many of them come!
I will fight them off!
Everyone!
Prepare to defend the Princess!
[melancholic music]
Oh, Poppa. I'm sorry.
[clattering]
[straining]
Pull! Pull!
My heavens, what a lot
of noise they're making!
How about a song to
make us feel better?
♪ Go round, go round,
waterwheel, go round, ♪
♪ go round, and call Mr. Sun. ♪
♪ Birds, bugs, beasts,
grass, flowers and trees. ♪
♪ Spring, summer, autumn,
winter, bring 'em all on. ♪
♪ Go round, go round,
waterwheel, go round, ♪
[both]
♪ go round, and call Mr. Sun. ♪
♪ Spring, summer, autumn,
winter, bring 'em all on. ♪
♪ Go round,
come round, distant time. ♪
♪ Come round, oh distant time. ♪
♪ Come round,
call back the heart. ♪
♪ Birds, bugs, beasts, grass,
flowers and trees, ♪
♪ teach people how to feel. ♪
♪ If I hear that
you pine for me, ♪
♪ I will want to
return to you. ♪
I wasn't aware there was
another verse.
I remember...
long ago in the
City of the Moon,
a woman who had just returned
from Earth sang this song.
Oh...
When you put on
the robe of the Moon,
all memories of the
Earth just disappear.
All grief and sadness are gone.
But when she sang that song...
I saw tears fall from her eyes.
[peaceful music]
It was such a mystery to me.
I had to know what
those feelings from Earth were.
[sighs]
That's why I broke the rules
to come to this place.
I wanted to feel all the
same things that she felt,
and now, I know exactly
what she was feeling
as she looked back at this land.
Tell me, dear.
She wanted...
to come back here.
To feel all of those wonderful
mysterious things again.
I know it.
If I hear that you pine for me,
I will want to return to you.
If you are waiting for me,
I will return to you,
come round, and call
back my heart.
[sobs]
I just... want to go home!
Prepare a carriage quickly.
Don't breathe a word to anyone.
[frogs croaking,
birds chirping]
[calm flute music]
[water trickling]
[rustling]
[gasps]
Ginger flowers!
[sighs]
It's been a long time.
Num-num!
What's the matter?
Hungry again?
Mama!
Did anybody hear that?
Hear what?
I'll go look.
[panting]
Sutemaru, it's you!
It's you!
Li'l Bamboo?
Is it okay if I call you that?
We were just coming
back here for the new trees.
And for some reason
coming over the pass I...
thought I heard
your voice, singing!
I'm so happy to see you!
[sighs]
Yeah.
Tell me, what are you doing
here... dressed like that?
All this time, I've wanted to
come back to my real home.
Your real home?
Here?
Mm-hmm.
But weren't you happy
in the capital?
Living in a mansion...
eating fine food...
wearing nice clothes?
All that time I was wishing
I was here on the mountain,
playing with everyone.
Well, everyone's gonna
be here soon.
And with you, Sutemaru...
With you, Sutemaru, I know...
I would've been truly happy.
Happy? With me?
Now I realize that.
You're joking, right?
I don't think you'd feel that
way if you were living like us.
Sure I would!
I did live like you,
when we were kids.
In rags like these?
Mm-hmm.
Half-starving, eating roots?
Sometimes stealing dinner
because you hadn't
eaten in days?
I saw that!
Yeah.
I also saw when they
beat you up.
Oh that? That was nothing.
It's nothing if you answer back!
Answer back by
simply being alive.
I just know I
would've been happy.
[peaceful music]
Li'l Bamboo!
[crying]
But it won't happen.
[gasps]
It's too late.
What do you mean?
Your promised to His Majesty?
No!
I won't belong to anyone!
- Let's run away!
- It can't happen.
Why not? We can leave right now!
Let's run!
Come with me and we'll go!
I'll carry you on my
back and run forever.
We'll go someplace
where nobody can ever find us.
I can't run away... not anymore.
Of course you can, Li'l Bamboo!
I'll protect you!
I'll protect you from everyone!
But they're coming for me.
Who's coming for you?
I've been found.
So what?
Even if you have been found!
So what?!
I don't care about that!
I want to run away with you!
Please!
Sutemaru!
Yes.
[grunting]
I'll run, too! As fast as I can!
[laughing]
[stammering]
Li'l Bamboo!
Sutemaru!
[both laughing]
[joyful music]
[Sutemaru yells]
[triumphant music]
O Heaven, O Earth!
Take me in!
[music swells]
[bright music]
[insects chirping]
[both laughing]
[rain splashing]
[Princess laughs]
[Sutemaru sighs]
[gulls crying]
[gasps]
No!
[Sutemaru gasps]
Please, let me stay just
a little longer!
To feel the joy and happiness
of living on this earth!
Please don't take me away!
It's all right, Li'l Bamboo.
I'll hold you tight.
I won't ever let go.
Hold me tighter!
I don't want to go.
[tense music]
Li'l Bamboo!
[gasps]
A dream?
[insects buzzing,
birds chirping]
It wasn't real?
[sighs]
Da da!
Hi.
[baby laughs]
[bay laughs]
Da da!
[baby coos]
[frogs croaking,
insects buzzing]
[Narrator]
And then at last...
the fifteenth day of
August came round.
[all gasping]
[steady music]
[music grows louder]
Fire!
[bells ringing]
[voices singing]
[music continues]
[gasping]
Princess!
Princess...
[string music]
[bells tinkling]
[bright music]
[music fades out]
[dogs barking]
[kids laughing]
[kids] ♪ Go round, go round,
waterwheel, go round. ♪
♪ Go round and call Mr. Sun. ♪
♪ Birds, bugs, beasts,
grass, flowers and trees. ♪
♪ Flower, bear fruit,
bear fruit, and die. ♪
♪ Be born, grow up, and die. ♪
♪ Still the wind blows
and the rain falls. ♪
♪ The waterwheel goes round. ♪
My little girl! My princess!
[gasps]
Please! No! No!
♪ Lifetimes come
and go in turn. ♪
[Momma]
Princess! Princess!
[Miyatsuko]
Princess! Princess...
♪ Over and over,
and life revives. ♪
[Miyatsuko, whispering]
Princess...
♪ Over and over, life renews. ♪
[Miyatsuko and Momma cry]
Princess! Don't leave us!
Not yet!
Please, not yet.
Once I don this robe,
I will forget everything
I know and love about this land.
So please, just for a moment.
- Princess!
- Daughter!
[all crying]
[Miyatsuko]
My little girl...
Please! Take us with you!
Take us with you!
Forgive me, Momma and Poppa,
please forgive me.
Now, now. Let us go.
This heavy heart
will no longer trouble you
in the City of the Moon.
And the memory of
this impure earth
will lift from
your mind forever.
It's not impure!
There is grief and sorrow here.
There is also joy and happiness.
All who live on this earth
experience them in
different shades.
All feel compassion.
Princess!
[Miyatsuko and Momma gasp]
[crying]
[Momma]
Princess!
[Momma sobs]
[bright music]
[Miyatsuko]
Princess!
[music fades]
[Momma cries]
[Miyatsuko] Forgive me!
Please... forgive me.
[soft piano music]
[somber music]
[singing in foreign language]
English Translation by
Ian MacDougall
Subtitles by Sarah Dunn
and David Jesteadt